---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Without Exceptions - NDK
author:
  display_name: godexsoft
  login: godexsoft
  email: godexsoft@gmail.com
  url: ''
author_login: godexsoft
author_email: godexsoft@gmail.com
wordpress_id: 5
wordpress_url: http://alex.tapmania.org/?p=5
date: '2010-09-10 05:24:09 +0100'
date_gmt: '2010-09-10 05:24:09 +0100'
categories:
- Development
tags:
- Android
- C++
- stl
- ndk
---
Believe it or not, but Android's NDK has disabled Exceptions, RTTI and NO STL by default.

It's a shame, because even though the limitation is inspired by speed concerns one
can't do much with C++ without exceptions and of course almost nothing without STL.

But hey, what about STLPort and uSTL you would say! --- I have tried to setup
STLPort and it worked (without compiling the iostreams though).  
However, some hacks are required to get std::string working.. there is a file from
the SGI STL which defines pair<>.  
I have no clue why it's there but that file messed up STLPort's pair<> of course.

So why it's still a fail? Because many game (not only?) engines rely on STL, exceptions and Boost.  
You can't expect a hardcore engine to be ported easily if you don't offer the core features of C++.

The ultimate solution: **Crystax's NDK**.  
Go and visit his website [here](http://www.crystax.net/android/ndk-r4.php).  
In short --- the guy patched the original NDK and added support for Exceptions,
RTTI and the full blown STL.  
It works great. My iPhone-centric unit testing library (SimpleUnit) jumped over
to android within 3 minutes. Go try it yourself.

I'm going to rework my game engine so that it will work on iPhone and Android
(with recompilation of course).  
Android is an emerging market and their technology is nice to use
(as long as you don't touch Eclipse and Java too much).
With a complete (well, almost complete) C++ I'm happy on Android just like I'm happy on iPhone.

Cheers.
